# asciicast v3

!!! warning

    While this new file format is mostly fleshed out, there still may be small
    changes made to it before the final release of the asciinema CLI 3.0.

asciicast v3 is a file format for terminal sessions recorded by [asciinema
CLI](../cli/index.md) 3.0 and later.

It's based on [newline-delimited JSON](http://jsonlines.org/).

First line, encoded as JSON object, represents [the header](#header), which
contains metadata, such as initial terminal size, timestamp, etc.

All following lines form [the event stream](#event-stream). _Each line_
represents a separate event, encoded as 3-element JSON array.

Lines starting with `#` character are treated as comments and ignored for most
intends and purposes. The first line of the file must not be a comment.

asciicast v3 file looks like this:

``` json
{"version": 3, "term": {"cols": 80, "rows": 24, "type": "xterm-256color"}, "timestamp": 1504467315, "title": "Demo", "env": {"TERM": "xterm-256color", "SHELL": "/bin/zsh"}}
# event stream follows the header
[0.248848, "o", "\u001b[1;31mHello \u001b[32mWorld!\u001b[0m\n"]
[1.001376, "o", "That was ok\rThis is better."]
[3.500000, "m", ""]
[0.143733, "o", "Now... "]
# terminal window resized to 90 cols and 30 rows
[2.050000, "r", "90x30"]
[1.541828, "o", "Bye!"]
```

## Header

asciicast header is JSON-encoded object containing recording metadata.

Complete header example, pretty formatted for readability:

```json
{
  "version": 3,
  "term": {
    "cols": 80,
    "rows": 24,
    "type": "xterm-256color",
    "version": "VTE(7802)",
    "theme": {
      "fg": "#d0d0d0",
      "bg": "#212121",
      "palette": "#151515:#ac4142:#7e8e50:#e5b567:#6c99bb:#9f4e85:#7dd6cf:#d0d0d0:#505050:#ac4142:#7e8e50:#e5b567:#6c99bb:#9f4e85:#7dd6cf:#f5f5f5"
    }
  },
  "timestamp": 1509091818,
  "idle_time_limit": 2,
  "command": "/bin/bash",
  "title": "Demo",
  "env": {
    "SHELL": "/bin/bash"
  }
}
```

Minimal header example:

```json
{"version": 3, "term": {"cols": 80, "rows": 24}}
```

Below list contains all attributes supported in the header. Attributes not
marked as required may be omitted from the header, as seen in the minimal
example above.

### `version`

Format version number.

Must be set to `3`.

__Required__ field.

Type: integer


### `term`

Terminal information.

__Required__ field.

Type: object with the following attributes:

#### `cols`

Terminal width, i.e. number of columns.

__Required__ field.

Type: integer

#### `rows`

Terminal height, i.e. number of rows.

__Required__ field.

Type: integer

#### `type`

Terminal type, e.g. xterm-256color.

Type: string

#### `version`

Terminal version as reported by XTVERSION OSC query.

Type: string

#### `theme`

Color theme of the recorded terminal.

Type: object, with the following attributes (all required):

- `fg` - normal text color,
- `bg` - normal background color,
- `palette` - list of 8 or 16 colors, separated by colon character.

All colors are in the CSS `#rrggbb` format.

Example theme, pretty formatted for readability:

```json
{
  "fg": "#d0d0d0",
  "bg": "#212121",
  "palette": "#151515:#ac4142:#7e8e50:#e5b567:#6c99bb:#9f4e85:#7dd6cf:#d0d0d0:#505050:#ac4142:#7e8e50:#e5b567:#6c99bb:#9f4e85:#7dd6cf:#f5f5f5"
}
```

!!! note

    asciinema CLI captures the original terminal theme automatically (since
    v3.0).

    If you're implementing an asciicast-compatible recorder, then you can
    retrieve the colors from the terminal via OSC sequences (this is how
    asciinema recorder does it). However, you can also use another technique,
    or even hard-code the colors of your favorite theme.

### `timestamp`

Unix timestamp of the beginning of the recording session.

Type: integer

### `idle_time_limit`

Idle time limit, as given via `-i` option to `asciinema rec`.

Type: float

This should be used by an asciicast player to reduce all terminal inactivity
(delays between frames) to a maximum of `idle_time_limit` value.

### `command`

Command that was recorded, as given via `-c` option to `asciinema rec`.

Type: string

### `title`

Title of the recording, as given via `-t` option to `asciinema rec`.

Type: string

### `env`

A map of captured environment variables.

Type: object (String -> String).

Example env:

```json
{"SHELL": "/bin/bash", "TERM": "xterm-256color"}
```

> Official asciinema recorder captures only `SHELL` variable by default. All
> implementations of asciicast-compatible terminal recorder should not capture
> any additional environment variables unless explicitly requested by the user.

## Event stream

Each element of the event stream is a 3-tuple encoded as JSON array:

    [interval, code, data]

Where:

* `interval` (float) - time interval from the previous event (in seconds),
* `code` (string) - event type code, one of: `"o"`, `"i"`, `"m"`, `"r"`
* `data` (any) - event specific data, described separately for each event
  code.

For example, let's look at the following line:

    [1.001376, "o", "Hello world"]

It represents:

* output (code `o`),
* of text `Hello world`,
* which happened `1.001376` sec after the previous event.

### Supported event codes

This section describes the event codes supported in asciicast v3 format.

The list is open to extension, and new event codes may be added in both the
current and future versions of the format. For example, we may add new event
code for text overlay (subtitles display).

A tool which interprets the event stream (a player or a post-processor) should
ignore (or pass through) event codes it doesn't understand or doesn't care
about.

#### o - output, data written to a terminal

Event with code `"o"` represents printing new data to a terminal.

`data` is a string containing the data that was printed. It must be valid, UTF-8
encoded JSON string as described in [JSON RFC section
2.5](http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4627.txt), with any non-printable Unicode
codepoints encoded as `\uXXXX`.

Example:

```json
[5.0, "o", "hello"]
```

#### i - input, data read from a terminal

Event with code `"i"` represents character typed in by the user, or more
specifically, raw data sent from a terminal emulator to stdin of the recorded
program (usually shell).

`data` is a string containing captured ASCII character representing a key, or a
control character like `"\r"` (enter), `"\u0001"` (ctrl-a), `"\u0003"` (ctrl-c),
etc. Like with `"o"` event, it's UTF-8 encoded JSON string, with any
non-printable Unicode codepoints encoded as `\uXXXX`.

Example:

```json
[5.0, "i", "h"]
```

!!! note

    asciinema CLI doesn't capture keyboard input by default. All implementations
    of asciicast-compatible terminal recorder should not capture it either
    unless explicitly requested by the user.

#### m - marker

Event with code `"m"` represents a marker.

[Markers](../cli/markers.md) can act as breakpoints or be used for playback navigation and
automation.

`data`, which specifies a label, is optional (can be empty string). Labels may
be used to e.g. create a list of named "chapters".

Example:

```json
[5.0,  "m", ""] // unlabeled marker
[3.0, "m", "Configuration"] // labeled marker
```

#### r - resize

Event with code `"r"` represents terminal resize.

Those are captured in response to `SIGWINCH` signal.

`data` contains new terminal size (columns + rows) formatted as
`"{COLS}x{ROWS}"`.

```json
[5.0, "r", "100x50"]
```

## File extension

Suggested file extension is `.cast`.

## Media type (MIME)

Suggested media type is `application/x-asciicast`.

## Note on compatibility

asciicast v3 file format is not backward compatible with asciicast v1/v2 due to
the header schema changes and use of relative time (intervals) in the event
stream (even though v1 uses relative time too).

However, the changes between v2 and v3 are relatively small when compared with
the changes between v1 and v2. Both v2 and v3 use the same newline-delimited
JSON format, with the first line being the header, and the following lines
being the event stream. Also, aside from time/intervals, both v2 and v3 use the
same notation and event codes for the event stream.

Support for asciicast v3 has been added in:

* asciinema cli [v3.0](https://github.com/asciinema/asciinema/releases/tag/v3.0.0-rc.4)
* asciinema player [v3.10.0](https://github.com/asciinema/asciinema-player/releases/tag/v3.10.0-rc.1)
* asciinema server [v202505xx](https://github.com/asciinema/asciinema-server/releases/tag/v202504xx)
